number one what is the immune system
the best visualization is uh i'm old
enough to remember a kid's game called
red rover red rover and actually most of
us remember that our the current
generation of children don't play that
game anymore where we all locked arms
and there were two lines of kids and you
ran across and had to break through the
arms and
you got captured or you took a captive
so the lining of our gut is actually the
same surface area as a tennis court
in there
and
unfortunately for us
the lining of the gut is only one cell
thick
and so imagine one cell thickness
keeping everything you eat or everything
living in you like bacteria separated
from you
and they're all held together locked arm
in arm with tight junctions now on the
other side of the wall
is your border patrol your immune system
and 65 of all the white cells in our
body are up against this wall
why are they there because that's where
the problem is going to happen if it's
going to happen
so when these foreign proteins get
across the wall the immune system
basically sounds the alarm
sounds the air raid sirens we go to
threat level five we scramble the
fighter jets and we actually go to war
status
and
as i talk about in the book that war
status is manifested in multiple ways
whether it's brain fog whether it's
arthritis whether it's depression or
anxiety
whether it's coronary artery disease
which is how i got interested in it in
the first place
and
all of these things come right back to
what hippocrates said 2500 years ago
that if you want to
cure the disease head to the gut
as you know the 70 of our immune system
is along our gut lining what we eat
is what feeds the microbiome and that
actually trains our immune system and
when your microbiome is out of balance
your immune system is out of balance and
when your body is out of balance it is
at not at ease and which is what we call
disease all right so let's back up and
give people a quick breakdown of exactly
what the microbiome is um and the
coolest example i've ever heard you use
is talking about humans as a form of ai
that's basically meant to lug around the
microbiome explain that i thought that
was really a pretty powerful insight
yeah so actually you know you think
about that and say how did humans
actually got created and if you think
from the perspective of the nature as
you know uh on on our spacecraft we call
planet earth these are single cell
organisms the eukaryotes and the
bacteria and viruses and the fungi and
east and the mold they have been around
for billions of years the humans are
give or take about a couple of hundred
thousand years old so you wonder how did
humans got created so here's my
tongue-in-cheek story of how i believe
it actually happened
one day all these organisms got together
they were living in africa and they say
you know we're sick and tired of living
in this small space we want to take over
the world and they all looked at each
other and one of the smarter ones said
you know i think i know what to do what
would you do
what if we can create something where
trillions of us can live inside it
all we have to do is keep this thing
healthy
it's going to walk around everywhere
we're going to make them crave what we
want they're going to find that food for
us they're going to go all over the
world they're going to poop everywhere
they're going to spread us around and
we're going to take over the world and
they created human
and the humans as the humans were
evolving
suddenly they started to worry as you
know we and you and i now worry about
artificial intelligence and we keep
wondering if this thing we just created
call artificial intelligence if someday
god is smarter than us what would happen
to us
and these guys were no dumb they start
thinking about that and so one of the
young one went to the master and said
master master we created this thing
called humans
what if this thing got smarter than us
what will we do master says not to worry
how so master he says right inside their
cell they call that mitochondria you
know it's one of her brothers right it's
one of the ancient bacteria we talk to
it all the time this thing is the energy
factory for their self they go out of
control we turn the energy off they're
done
they say master you're so brilliant
until the another younger one said
master master you're completely
forgetting the point here they're
starting to develop this thing called
brain what are we going to do with that
masters is not to worry
remember most of us live inside the gut
we put a direct connection from the gut
right to their brain they call that a
vagus nerve and they they don't quite
remember just because they call it a
vagus nerve like las vegas what happens
in the gut doesn't stay in the gut it
goes everywhere
we in fact
control what happens in their brain
and we let them know what we want
through something they call
neurotransmitters so you remember
serotonin yeah i remember serotonin it
makes them feel good yeah guess what we
produce 90 percent of the serotonin
right in the gut we don't let them
produce it they want to feel good they
got to feed us
and
all this stuff they controlled our
amygdala through their micro rna
interference they control our prefrontal
cortex so our decision making our
behavior what we do what we want is
controlled by them and you see young
ones just remember like a good leader
we make them think they're making a
decision we are the ones simply pulling
the strings so just sit back enjoy and
let them take care of us
number two
how do we level up our immune system so
you know one of the families this lady
was overweight i diagnosed her with type
2 diabetes right
real loaded joint pain um which her
doctors had told her she was only i
think late 30s
she was overweight
i think it was about 200 pounds okay um
really bad knee and so knee and ankle
pain okay and she was told you know
you're gonna have to take
anti-inflammatories because your weight
is so much you're putting too much
strain on your joints
you know etc etc you felt quite low
sometimes all these sort of things and i
could tell just by seeing this
at the root cause here
she's got inflammation going on in her
body i need to get her inflammation
levels down quickly and let's see how
many of these seemingly separate
symptoms start to get better right so we
drastically i drastically changed the
diet i said look
i'm going to i'm going to help you i'm
going to walk you through this one hold
your hand through this process but the
first few days are going to be hard
there's no question but i'm going to
help you do that
the diet was designed around her type 2
diabetes but i'll tell you what was the
most incredible thing for me is three
days in
said i don't have any joint pain
i said what nothing she says no my ankle
pain is just gone i don't have any
she has not lost enough weight
in three days
to get rid of her joint pain right
arguably she hasn't lost any weight
what's going on there what's going on
there as people don't realize that food
is information it's not just calories
it's not just blood sugar it's
information the food that you eat
interacts with your gut bugs and it
interacts with your immune system so i
think of these three things diets
gut microbiome and immune system and
these three things interact with each
other
right meaning they're communicating with
with each other their state influences
the state of the other exactly okay
and when people talk about inflammation
a lot of people have heard that chronic
inflammation is behind
many of the conditions we see today
whether it's obesity type 2 diabetes
some cases of depression all kinds of
things come from inflammation
inflammation comes from your immune
system and most of your immune system
resides inside your gut so if you eat
food that's going to give your
your body the information that
everything's okay that i don't need to
you know think that my body's under
attack because that's ultimately what
inflammation is right inflammation
in the short term helps us so if if i
get up to say hi to you and i twist my
ankle right my ankle is going to get
swollen red hot that's inflammation
that's a good thing it's going to help
my ankle heal
but that inflammation should switch off
in a few days and everything goes back
to normal
if that inflammation stays switched on
indefinitely that's the problem that's
what we're seeing cause all these
problems these days that's what that
lady had she had chronic inflammation
your body thinks it's under attack the
food you're putting in makes your body
think i'm under attack here i need to
put out inflammation to try and dampen
everything down so what i did with this
lady is her diet was full of colorful
vegetables okay i cut out all the
refined and processed food she was
having just real natural foods that's
all we did with her right but then
suddenly
that interaction between her food her
gut microbes and her immune system
everything calms down
i love those too because there's
actually a hugely intimate connection
between the microbiome and the second
brain
so the microbiome is a term
for
a the colony of bacteria
that live reside in the large intestine
we also have a microbiome on our skin
and in our mucous membranes and in our
genital urinary tract and like in our
scalp
the one the microbiome in the gut
they number between
1 trillion and 10 trillion
cells
so humans are we humans each of us has
about a trillion cells so we are at
least
as much bacterial as we are human
if we took all the bacteria out of like
an inch and a half of your large
intestine more bacteria live there than
all humans that have ever lived
since the dawn of our species okay
that's a lot so we are really um
outnumbered
but
and so so for their their stats
collectively they weigh about three or
four pounds right so this is like organ
size
and they are represented by
thousands of different species and
strains
and you use the word ecosystem and i
love that because it is the microbiome
is very much an ecosystem
and like an ecosystem on earth
diversity is like the buffer against
ruin right so you want your gut to have
a lot of different species
because if
i don't know you get a pathogen or you
take antibiotics like that's going to
wipe some of your guys out so you want
other guys to be able to take over it's
just like if you you know
you have a garden but you're only
growing lettuce say well say the slugs
move in right you're going to lose your
whole garden but if you were growing
lettuce and carrots and blueberries and
had an apple tree like the slugs aren't
going to make you lose everything you
have that diversity in there to buffer
against
negative consequence and the microbiome
is very very hot right now there's a lot
of research that's being
done on it and what we're learning is
that
it does everything from
helping us
humanize the food we eat so we eat a lot
of plants right what does that mean so
humanize means
our bacteria help take plant nutrients
and plant pieces you know to be
extremely simplistic and manipulate them
so that they can be absorbed and
utilized by our human cells so it's
almost like a conduit or like they're
alchemical it's like they're creating
this alchemy that allows us to actually
derive the nutrition from the foods that
we're eating the microbiome also helps
manufacture
certain uh vitamins and um like sort of
sub vitamins so it also helps with blood
pressure and blood lipids and our
waistline
and
it helps talk to our immune system so
that our immune system doesn't become
over stimulated or too lazy it talks
with our enteric nervous system to help
promote optimal motility it recycles
reduces detoxifies
a number of different hormones it
activates certain hormones i mean what
have i met like there's there's
virtually no corner of our body that our
microbiome doesn't touch
taking if people have eczema you know
like skin rashes dermatitis acne
probiotics can help with that you have
environmental allergies probiotics can
help with that
number three
what exactly should we be eating for
immune health
well
you know
all food is information not just
calories it's all information it's
instructions it's literally like code
that programs your biology with every
bite so at like an epigenetic level it's
in every level so every bite of food you
take can change your gene expression
across a whole range of genes so you eat
green you drink green tea or eat
broccoli you upregulate the gene called
glutathione as transferase that helps
you detoxify heavy metals environmental
chemicals metabolic toxins
um
so so it regulates your genes it
regulates your hormones so if you lost
starch and sugar it increases insulin
lowers testosterone increases estrogen
for example
it affects your brain chemistry and what
your hunger hormones are your craving
levels are
and what foods you you know you're
attracted to it affects your immune
system it regulates inflammation or it's
anti-inflammatory it regulates your
microbiome with every bite so every
single system of your body is regulated
by the quality of the food you eat
and when you realize
you shouldn't just focus on calories you
should focus on quality and the
information you're eating changed
everything so that's really what i have
people focus on and i think when people
do that then you have a different
relationship to your food you go well
i'm eating am i going to need toxic
information or am i going to eat healing
information
so if you had to just put together an
all-weather eating strategy what would
the
ideal in air quotes i wrote about it i
wrote a whole book about it it's called
food what the heck should i eat and it's
about
these principles like homopagan
principles it's really focused on
quality first right
nobody thinks we should be
adding additives and hormones and
abiotics and pesticides and glyphosate
to our food like it's in it but nobody's
like yeah we avoid it at the grocery
store uh you know if you look at the
label of something if it has something
you can't recognize pronounce
uh then you shouldn't have it or if you
don't have it in your cupboard at home
like
butylated hydroxytoluene which is in
almost every processed food is bht it's
illegal in europe you wouldn't sprinkle
it on your salad would you but no no so
that's a good rule uh the second
principle is you know we should be
eating a plant-rich diet uh and and
across the spectrum from
fruits and vegetables to do you treat
fruits and vegetables as sort of one in
the same or no it should be vegetables
and fruit right so it's like we should
you don't want to be consuming only
fruit because that's full of sugar and
and if you're diabetic or you're
overweight or have issues you might want
to cut back on the sugary fruits or eat
berries which are less glycemic
lots of nuts and seeds everybody agrees
with being lots of nuts and seeds you
want to soak them reduce selecting
that's fine
if you're going to eat beans and grains
pick low starch ones right and and also
give us a few examples so like black
rice which is like the blueberries of
rice quinoa what does that mean well the
black rice was called the emperor's rice
or forbidden rice and it's full of these
dark it's black so anytime you see color
in nature there are polyphenols and
phytochemicals in there so it's got more
antioxidants per serving than
blueberries and then and then you want
to make sure
if you're eating you know grains like
gluten grains are are interesting so
most of the gluten we eat is is wheat
it's 133 pounds per person per year
that's a pharmacologic dose it is worse
for your blood sugar than table sugar
really yes
what yes when you look at the glycemic
index which is how much the fixed amount
of the food will raise your blood sugar
table sugar is
80 bread is a hundred
whoa i had no idea why
because it's so processed and so quickly
absorbed and if you want to eat like if
you're not gluten sense you want to have
pharaoh or einkorn wheat or you know
spell you might tolerate those because
those aren't highly altered genetically
but the new the wheat we eat is super
starchy has a lot more glyden proteins
create more gluten sensitivity is
sprayed with glyphosate at harvest to to
de defoliate the plants and it also has
preservative called calcium proprionate
which causes autism in animal models and
is shown to cause behavioral problems in
kids
so add all that stuff could be all the
flour so i'm not a big flower person
plus it's just like sugar so if you want
to have other grains if you're not going
to say like rye or barley that's fine
and then beans again you know lime beans
kidney beans if you're if look 75
percent of americans are overweight so
most people should eat a lot of starch
and that you know you have to eat three
cups of beans to get the equivalent of
like four six ounces of protein uh so i
have this lentils and things like that
um which are lower starch beans suzuki
beans other kinds of beans i talk about
in my book and then if you're eating
animal products you want to animal
products that are not
going to hurt the animals not going to
hurt you and not going to hurt the
environment right so for
beef it should be regeneratively raised
ideally which is hard to find but you
can actually get more and more of that
around and there's ways to do it by by
looking online to get it looking thrive
market is a great resource for
regeneratively raised beef
and again chicken should be pasta raised
pork and all that should be raised in
ways that are are more organic or
sustainable
fish you want to eat fish that's
sustainably harvested or you know
sustainably organically
aquacultured uh because we over harvest
the fish and then we don't eat big fish
it's like full of mercury and tuna and
swords just because they've lived longer
well what happens is the coal and all
the fossil fuels go in the ocean
going to algae it's storing the algae
that the little fish eat the algae then
the little bigger fish eat the little
fish and it goes on up the food chain
and you've got a swordfish or a tuna
these are monster fish and they've
bio-accumulated all this and so
you want to you know eat the right
animal products you want to eat the
right grains the right beans the right
vegetables the right fruits right nuts
give me the right vegetables are we just
looking for a color so so non-starchy
vegetables if you want to cut out night
shades and get rid of the lectins that's
fine you know i don't care but i love
tomatoes i'm not gonna do that and they
don't make me feel bad we need our
immune system to do what it's designed
to do we just don't need it getting all
hot and bothered like it can with
autoimmunity so
with myself and with my son we
absolutely use food
so no gluten for him in particular uh he
can't do dairy and sugar
doesn't flame him oh sugar's so bad so
bad um
it was i mean that's part of
when we went to paris
what did this kid get i mean so we pull
back some supplements because we're
traveling for a week we don't we're
going to keep the probiotic we don't
need the vitamin d and fish oil it's
going to be okay
except those three things are great at
modulating the immune system so i pull
those and i'm like we're in paris let's
have gelato my child
has like a psychiatric breakdown um and
even once we figured out it was pandas
if he got into any sugar things got so
much worse for him so
for him sugar's no go um but you know i
don't like to focus on what not to eat
and so very much my focus is let's bring
in so much great quality food that you
don't feel deprived and you don't feel
like oh
you know i'm like i i don't get to eat
nobody ever wants to go gluten-free like
it's it's delicious yet we have to
recognize that in our country it's a
privilege i mean it's great privilege
that we can pick and choose what we want
to eat and we have i mean never in
history have had such access to food i
mean here we were talking about turmeric
that was not around when i was a kid
so with my son and with myself we focus
a lot on high quality produce and high
quality protein high quality fats so can
you give us some in each category yeah
no cruciferous vegetables always part of
the playlist daily um we love broccoli
cauliflower brussels sprouts just
yesterday him and i were on instagram
eating uh raw cabbage great for when you
fly because it helps with liver
detoxification i actually that's the
thing when you fly
oh my goodness so i did i did a toxin
panel and i did my toxins like ah not
too bad i wonder if what happens when i
travel
i go traveling and i came back and with
that test my glyphosate the metabolites
for rocket fuel for pesticides now i
grow a lot of my own food and i have had
a chemical-free yard
and my house is non-toxic chemicals for
for 12 years now
so to see all of this i'm like wow what
is that that's being in airplanes that's
sleeping on mattresses in hotels that's
walking around where like hotels
spraying glyphosate and these other
chemicals around and so we actually get
exposed to a lot of environmental toxins
on planes and
that's why we love cruciferous
vegetables and if you're someone so as
you were saying like so if your partner
has digestive issues like cruciferous
vegetables especially raw that's not
going to work for you you can actually
select for sprouts instead so this is a
really economical and really
nutrient-dense dense
approach
broccoli sprouts
if you have about a quarter cup of them
it's equivalent to what over two pounds
of broccoli itself can give you in terms
of sulfurophane and
the molecules that eventually become dim
and dim helps with liver detoxification
and so when it comes to fat we do want
to have variety but we want to avoid
things like hydrogenated fats anything
again if the chemist made it you
probably don't want to eat it because
mama nature she don't get it wrong very
often but humans we get it wrong a lot
and then it's like generations later
that we're like oh what do we do
so when it comes to fats i like to look
at
whole food fat so egg yolks getting
avocados coming in eating nuts and seeds
so bringing those in part of your diet
maybe it's part of seed cycling or
you're just adding them i think seeds
are such a great economical and nutrient
dense way to really boost your nutrition
getting other foods like cold water fish
in some
well-cut salmon sardines mackerel these
fatty fish great sources of omega-3
fatty acids you were all worried about
metal heavy metals of course we are
right what what how do we steer that
game with fish yeah smaller the fish the
better that's what we've come to
understand so like i grew up and we ate
shark and swordfish and my son's not
going to eat those things because that's
just the reality of the state of the
planet right now
so in that getting small fish this is
definitely the best way to go if you are
vegan or vegetarian
they often you know to get omega-3s they
opt for algae
or they'll go with flax and the thing we
have to understand is that
as women especially we actually require
our own natural estrogen to make the
conversion from plant-based omegas into
the epa and dha that we use so it's
anti-inflammatory great for the brain
so
if you're on hormonal birth control
though you're not making your own
estrogen and if you're inflamed and
you're having mood symptoms you may very
well
need to start thinking about going with
the fish oil
so with those fats uh the other thing is
bringing in grass-fed butter
coconut oil you know when i was getting
my nutrition degree we were taught that
saturated fat was the devil in the
clinical side it was like
you know saturated fat and cholesterol
heart disease and then in the science
classes it was like inflammation causes
heart disease okay we're gonna your
immune system is gonna cause oxidation
oxidation of the fat that's gonna cause
the plaques that's the problem and i'm
like okay so like in clinical practice
they're saying this and yet over here in
the science they're like no it's
inflammation it's immune system
dysregulation i mean this is like 20
years ago we knew this and there's still
people out there being like if you eat
butter you're gonna die
well i don't know i don't think it's
just gonna be butter okay like it's
probably gonna be compounded like
everything else
i cannot stress the importance of your
health enough if there's anything i've
learned from doing this show it's that
health really does start in the gut not
only did i learn that from the show the
show exists because i learned that from
my wife it is so important so if you
want to take care of your immune system
and thus your life
head to the gut stay healthy guys wash
your hands and be legendary my friends
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential